PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
awareness of the perturbation in older adults, this might be an issue with the questionnaire’s
construct validity, as the same participants show no effect of age on adaptation to a 30˚ rota-
tion. In a more recent, comprehensive study, Vandevoorde & Orban de Xivry [14] show
decreased explicit learning in older adults and find that this was compensated with implicit
learning–which may also explain the findings of Noohi et al. [13]. However, other groups have
shown that implicit learning is limited [17, 35], so that implicit adaptation may only compen-
sate for deficits in explicit learning to a limited extent or older adults may have an increased
capacity for implicit learning. In this study, we will use visuomotor adaptation and first assess
the extent that aging affects the ability to initially adopt and later maintain explicit strategies
and then gauge different implicit contributions.
If a decrease in explicit learning in older adults is compensated by increased implicit learn-
ing, we should not only be able to measure this in reach aftereffects, but also in shifted esti-
mates of hand location. Visuomotor adaptation leads to shifts in estimates of hand location,
that can be based on proprioception and on predicted sensory consequences, and we consider
both to be implicit. Proprioceptive estimates of hand location have been robustly shown to
shift, or be recalibrated, following both force-field adaptation [43, 44] and visuomotor adapta-
tion [45–52] where hand location estimates shift in the direction of the visual feedback on
hand location by ~20% of the visuomotor distortion [45–52]. In turn, this visually-induced
change in hand proprioception appears to contribute to changes in motor performance, partic-
ularly reach aftereffects [53–57]. These changes in proprioception seem to be largely implicit,
in that they are not affected by instructions [16], or by introducing the rotation abrupt or grad-
ually [58] Proprioceptive recalibration also does not change with age when using the usual per-
ceptual reports [45, 56]. Thus, if implicit processes compensate for age-related declines in
cognitive or sensory processes, this may affect proprioceptive recalibration. While previous
findings predict that proprioceptive recalibration should not differ between older and younger
adults, we will test this here with a different measure.
Like proprioception, efferent-based hand position estimates are an important contributor
to state estimation and are central to adaptation. In fact, many computational models of motor
learning specify that predicted sensory consequences based on efferent signals, must be
updated for implicit motor learning to occur [59]. The amount of change in these state esti-
mates has been quantified by measuring changes in hand localization following visuomotor
adaptation [16, 47, 49, 60, 61]. Synofzik et al. [60] and Izawa et al. [61] find that cerebellar
patients show reduced but substantial adaptation-induced changes in hand location estimates,
about 50% of those in healthy controls and conclude that the reduction reflects the critical role
that the cerebellum plays in updating predicted sensory consequences for learning. Further,
the remaining shifts in hand localization in these patients suggest that the part of these learn-
ing-induced changes that may be due to proprioceptive recalibration could occur outside the
cerebellum [56]. The contributions of the afferent and efferent sources of these changes in
hand localization have been recently investigated in young adults [16, 47, 49, 62]. However, it
is not clear how predicted estimates of hand location change with healthy aging, or if they are
more affected by (compensate for) either age-related cognitive- or sensory changes, so that we
will test this here.
Here we investigate the extent to which age-related deficits in outcomes of motor learning–
both reach aftereffects and hand localization shifts–could be explained by the distinct effects of
age on explicit adaptation and the implicit contributions of shifts in proprioceptive and predic-
tive estimates of hand locations to implicit adaptation. To do so, we use a 30˚ rotation which
allows us to evoke explicit learning in half the participants by providing them with instructions
[16, 29]. This way we can directly assess the differences between adaptation with and without
explicit contributions, specifically how this affects shifts in hand location estimates. In
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
3 / 20