PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
particular, we first test if there are any age-related differences in cognitive strategies during
and after motor adaptation by assessing the impact of instruction in both older and younger
adults. We also assess whether there are age-related differences in implicit contributions to no-
cursor reaches. Finally, and most importantly, we test whether aging affects shifts in proprio-
ceptive and predictive hand location estimates as components of implicit adaptation. Our
results provide a more comprehensive understanding of how age affects the contributions of
explicit and implicit processes to visuomotor adaptation, primarily the adaptation-induced
changes in hand location estimates.
Methods
Participants
Forty-one younger (mean age of 20.9 years, SD = 2.77) and thirty-eight older (mean age of
70.0 years, SD = 6.78) adults were recruited through various research participant pools at York
University: the Undergraduate Research Participant Pool (URPP), Kinesiology Undergraduate
Research Participant Pool (KURE), York Research Participant Pool (YRPP), and also from the
surrounding community. The participants from the undergraduate research pools were given
course credit for participation. Older adults who were recruited through the YRPP or the com-
munity were paid a honorarium and lunch, as required by the YRPP, to compensate for time
and travel to the university. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity,
were right handed, and self-reported that they were in good health and were able to under-
stand the tasks. Participants gave their informed written consent before taking part in the
study. The York Human Participants Review Sub-committee approved this study (#2014–
240).
All participants adapted to a 30˚ visuomotor rotation, however just before the rotated ses-
sion, half of each age group were given explicit instructions on the nature of the perturbation,
and a strategy to counter the rotation, while the other half received no instructions. Thus,
there were four groups: non-instructed younger adults (n = 20, 14 female), instructed younger
adults (n = 21, 13 female), non-instructed older adults (n = 19, 6 female) and instructed older
adults (n = 19, 14 female). The instructions were meant to result in a cognitively accessible
strategy, although participants could also spontaneously develop a cognitive strategy. The dif-
ference between the instructed and non-instructed groups in the availability of a strategy was
tested by asking people to reach with or without their strategy–whether or not this strategy was
obtained from instructions or spontaneously developed. Then finally, we could compare hand
localization shifts between older and younger adults, gauging the influence of explicit adapta-
tion on hand localization shifts in the two age groups.
We excluded 4 younger (all from the non-instructed group) and 3 older (1 non-instructed,
2 instructed) participants. One older participant didn’t complete the experiment. All other
excluded participants often “leaned on” the robot manipulandum during the 300 ms pre-reach
hold period (see below) so that when the handle was released they made a sudden hand move-
ment toward themselves and away from the targets. That is why, in these participants, reach
direction relative to the target direction could not be determined for a lot of trials. The data of
the excluded participants was never fully pre-processed and hence not statistically analyzed
nor included in the online data set.
Setup
Participants were seated in front of a table on a height-adjustable chair so that they could com-
fortably see and reach to displayed targets projected on a reflective surface from a monitor
(Samsung 510 N, 60 Hz), located 28 cm above a 2-joint robot manipulandum (Interactive
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
4 / 20