PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
Fig 1. Apparatus and experimental setup. A: Participants moved their right hand while gripping the handle of a two-joint robot manipulandum. Stimuli are produced by
a downward-facing monitor (top surface) above a reflective surface (middle). The touchscreen panel is located below the reflective surface and just above the robot handle
(bottom). B: Training task: The three white hollow circles represent the targets. They can either be directly in front of the home position, 45˚ clockwise (CW) or counter
clockwise (CCW) from it. During the main rotated reach training, the cursor was blue and rotated 30˚ CW (white solid vector) relative to the actual (unseen) hand
position/direction (black dashed vector). C: Localization task: Using ‘t Hart and Henriques [33] localization task, the unseen right hand was moved to a location along a
white arc either by participants voluntarily moving their hand or having their hand physically moved by the robot. Once participants returned their right hand to the home
position, they indicated on the touchscreen with their visible left hand, where their trained right hand had intersected the arc (illustrated by red star).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032.g001
Motion Technologies Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA). The reflective surface was 14 cm above the
robot manipulandum and 14 cm below the downward facing monitor (Fig 1A). The chair was
fixed in its position for the duration of the experiment. Participants were asked to grip a verti-
cal handle with their right hand. They were instructed to place their right thumb on a screw
located on top of the robot handle. The handle was attached to the free end of the robot manip-
ulandum and could be moved on a horizontal plane. A thick black cloth was draped and
tucked over participants’ right shoulder to ensure that they did not see their right arm.
Since the reflective surface was located halfway between the monitor and the robot manipu-
landum, the reflection of the cursor and the targets appeared on the same plane as the thumb
of the right hand. The reflective surface also occluded the right hand and arm.
During some tasks, participants used their visible left hand, which was then illuminated by
a lamp, to respond on a touchscreen panel (Keytec Inc., Garland, TX, USA sampled at a resolu-
tion of 1440 × 900 pixels) located 2 cm above the robot handle, to indicate the perceived posi-
tion of their unseen right thumb (Fig 1A and 1C).
Procedure
The procedure and set up are similar to our previous study [16], and could be completed in 90
minutes (excluding breaks and instructions). It includes two experimental sessions (Fig 2),
and each session had several repetitions of the same four tasks (described in detail below). The
first session (illustrated on the top row of Fig 2) measured baseline results where the cursor
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
5 / 20