PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
Fig 2. Task order. Top row: First session was the baseline session, where the cursor was aligned with the hand position in reach training tasks. Bottom row: Second
session involved training with a rotated cursor. Each session began with reach training and consisted of four tasks (e.g. reach training, active localization, passive
localization, and no cursor reaches). Each set of four tasks represents a block, and each block was completed four times, starting with training. This was followed by
two hand localization tasks, during which either the participants moved their own unseen hand to the arc (active localization) or the robot guided their hand (passive
localization). “Top-up” reach training followed each of these localization tasks. Each block ended with a no-cursor reach task. For the no-cursor reaches following
training with a visuomotor rotation in the second session (bottom), participants completed this task twice, once when told to not use their strategy (no-cursor reaches
without strategy) and once when told to use it (no-cursor reaches with strategy). The order of these two tasks were counterbalanced within and between participants.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032.g002
was aligned with the hand during reach training. The second session (bottom row) had train-
ing with a 30˚ CW rotated cursor as illustrated in Fig 1B. Initial reach training was followed by
several other tasks (see Fig 2) to measure training-induced changes, interleaved with additional
training to counter decay. Each block of tasks was repeated four times in each session. During
the break between the two sessions, half of the participants were instructed about the nature of
this 30˚ perturbation in the second session while the other half were not. Some older partici-
pants took additional breaks, as desired, but only right before a reach training task. After com-
pleting both sessions of the experiment, participants were then asked a series of questions to
assess awareness of the perturbation (https://osf.io/qzhmy/).
Before each task started, a short reminder of what to do was displayed. Each task consisted
of a number of trials, and involved one of several kinds of hand displacements. At the begin-
ning of each trial the hand was locked into place for 300 ms at the home position (~20 cm in
front of the participant on their body midline). While the hand was locked in place, either a
target or an arc was displayed. After the hand displacement trial, participants returned their
hand to the home position along a constrained straight path, generated by a perpendicular
resistant force of 2 N/(mm/s) and a viscous damping of 5 N/(mm/s), to begin the next trial.
The different tasks are described below.
Training.
During reach training tasks (Fig 1B), participants’ hand position was repre-
sented as a cursor (1.0 cm in diameter) which was green when it moved in alignment with the
hand, and blue when it represented the hand position rotated 30˚ around the home position.
At the beginning of the trial the hand was locked into place, while a target was displayed as a
yellow dot (1.0 cm in diameter) located 12 cm straight in front of the home position (at 90˚) or
diagonally to the right (45˚) or to the left (135˚). After 300 ms the hand was released, and the
participant was to move the cursor to the target, i.e. get the center of the hand cursor within
0.5 cm of the target’s center. Then the target and cursor disappeared and participants moved
their hand back to the home position along a constrained straight path, to begin the next trial.
In the first session, (top row of Fig 2), the cursor was aligned with the hand position. The
first aligned training task included 45 trials. In between the other tasks (localization and no-
cursor tasks), additional blocks of 9 identical training trials were performed. In the second
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
6 / 20