PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
session (bottom row of Fig 2), the cursor represented the hand position, but rotated by 30˚
CW relative to the home position. The first rotated training task included 90 trials while subse-
quent rotated training tasks consisted of 30 trials to keep adaptation saturated.
Instructions.
For both the older and younger adult groups, half of the participants were
instructed on a strategy to counteract the 30˚ CW cursor rotation, and the other half did not
get this instruction. Instruction was provided using an animation as well as a verbal explana-
tion and a clock diagram (used in [29]), where 1 hour represents 30˚ (see https://osf.io/qzhmy/
). It was ensured that participants understood these instructions; i.e., that they could draw, for
at least three times, an arrow on a clock illustrating the direction at which they would reach
when using the provided strategy. The non-instructed participants were told that “the reach
training tasks will be different as the cursor will not move the same way as it did previously,
and they will need to compensate for it by figuring out an appropriate strategy”. Both
instructed and non-instructed participants were also told they would be called upon to use
their strategy during some subsequent reaches and not use the strategy in other reaches
(described in detail below).
No-cursor reaches.
Participants reached to the same three targets as in the training trials
(see above) but without visual feedback about the position of their hand (i.e. no cursor). Trials
were considered complete when participants had moved away from the home position and
indicated that they had acquired the target by holding their hand still for 500 ms. Then the tar-
get disappeared, and participants moved the robot handle back to the home position, through
a constrained channel, to begin the next trial. During the first, aligned session, the no-cursor
reach tasks involved asking participants to reach nine times in each of four tasks (for a total of
36 trials; 12 to each target). During the second, rotated session, these no-cursor trials were split
into two sub-tasks (of nine trials each). In one sub-task, participants viewed the words “No-
Cursor with Strategy” displayed on the monitor and were required to use the strategy that they
also used during their recent training with the blue cursor. In the other subtask, participants
saw the words “No-Cursor without Strategy” and they were asked to not use a compensatory
strategy and reach as they did in the aligned session (as in [15]). The order of these subtasks
was counterbalanced between and within each consecutive participant: some started with
strategy and some without and this order was inverted in subsequent no-cursor tasks for every
participant. Each pair of subtasks was repeated four times (for a total of 72 trials; 24 to each tar-
get, 12 of which with and 12 without strategy).
The results of the no-cursor reaches with and without strategy were compared as per a pro-
cess dissociation procedure (PDP; see [15]), to determine the levels of explicit and implicit
learning. The no-cursor reaches without strategy reflect implicit learning (involuntary reach
aftereffects) while any additional deviation in the direction of no-cursor reaches with strategy
reflects explicit learning. This procedure was used to determine if participants were aware of
the nature of the rotation, and could apply the strategy at will, even if they had no visual feed-
back of their hand. This allowed testing if the instructions lead to explicit learning, and if this
was different for the two age groups.
Localization tasks. The localization tasks assessed the participants’ estimated location of
their unseen hand following reach training, when they either reached with their hand them-
selves (active localization) or when the robot displaced their hand (passive localization) to the
white arc (Figs 1C and 2). Both active and passive localization allowed the use of afferent infor-
mation on hand position. Since participants generated a motor command in active localiza-
tion, they also had efferent information on hand location in this localization task [16, 47, 49].
By measuring both, we can tease apart the contribution of (and changes in) afferent and effer-
ent estimates for hand localization.
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
7 / 20