PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
In the active localization tasks, participants made a quick and straight hand movement with
the robot manipulandum toward a chosen point on a white arc located 12 cm away from the
home position. The arc was 0.5 cm wide, spanned 60˚ and was put in three locations: centred
on 50˚, 90˚, or 130˚ in polar coordinates (Fig 1C shows the 50˚ position). When the robot han-
dle reached the distance of the arc, a force “cushion” was applied to prevent the participant
from moving their hand past the arc, giving them the sensation of hitting a soft wall. After “hit-
ting the wall”, participants returned their right hand to the home position (along the same con-
strained path as in the other tasks), and then used their visible, and untrained left hand to
indicate on the touch screen the point where they thought the right hand intersected the arc
(Fig 1C). To avoid unwanted contact with the touch screen, participants placed their left hand
under their chin between each response. Six hand localization trials were completed at each of
the arc locations (for a total of 18 trials) for each of the four repetitions (Fig 2) which sum to a
total of 72 trials per session.
In the passive localization tasks, the participants’ unseen right hand was pulled by the robot
manipulandum to a specific point on the arc on each trial. These points were the endpoints of
the reaches generated by the participant in the preceding active localization task. Like in the
active localization task, participants returned their hand to the home position along a con-
strained path and then indicated with their visible left hand, the location of the point on the
arc where the right hand had been (Fig 1). This was done for the same number of trials as in
the active localization task.
Data processing
For all trial types, angular deviations were calculated. For training trials, this was the angle
between a line through the home position and the target, and a line through the home position
and the position of the hand at maximum velocity on the outward part of the reach. For no
cursor trials, the position of the hand at the end of the reach was used instead. For localization
trials, the angle between a line through the home position and the actual position of the unseen
right hand and a line through the home position and the location indicated with the seen left
hand on the touch screen was calculated.
The hand path and velocity profile of every single reach trial (with cursor or without) and
the endpoint for every localization trial were visually inspected for quality to remove trials
with obvious measurement or task errors, such as failure to reach the target, understand task
instructions, or localization responses that did not land near the visually presented arc as
required. We removed slightly fewer trials from younger adults’ data (training: 1.4%, no-cur-
sor: 1.2%, localization: 1.1%) than from older adults’ data (training: 2.0%, no-cursor: 2.6%,
localization: 1.9%), but percentages are low overall (more details: R notebook).
All statistical analyses were done using R 3.4.4 (R Core Team, 2018). All statistical tests used
an alpha level of 0.05, and for ANOVAs where sphericity was violated, the Greenhouse-Geisser
corrections were used. Partial eta-squares (denoted η2) were used to report effect size for sig-
nificant effects in ANOVAs. Significant interactions were followed up with a Welch Two Sam-
ple t-test (correcting for unequal variances), with eta-squared as effect size (also denoted η2).
Results
Rotated reach training
Before investigating the localization shifts, we first wanted to confirm that the effect of instruc-
tion (instructed or non-instructed) on initial reach adaptation was similar for older and youn-
ger adults (Fig 3). To do this we compared the reach deviations during the first three reach
training trials, second set of three trials and the final set of 15 trials of the 90 trials in the initial
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
8 / 20