PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
we expect the corresponding no-cursor reach deviations when asked to reach with a strategy
to be larger than those when asked not to use the strategy. And, for those who are not aware,
there should be no difference between these two no-cursor reach tasks. We used this process
dissociation procedure [15, 16] (PDP), to determine whether this measure of awareness varied
with age. There was a main effect of age F (1, 75) = 5.66, p = 0.02, η2 = 0.07, which could sug-
gests older adults had larger with- and without-strategy reach aftereffects, and relied more on
implicit learning. This was not systematically the case however; as Fig 4, and post-hoc tests
showed (see R notebook), this effect was small and driven solely by the instructed older adults
reach deviations in the without-strategy condition. We also found an interaction between
instruction and strategy use, F (1, 75) = 35.56, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.12. This suggests that only
those given instructions produced larger no-cursor reach deviations when asked to use the
strategy (right side of Fig 4) when compared to not using the strategy (left side of Fig 4). More
importantly, we found no difference in this pattern between older adults (blue and purple) and
younger adults (orange and red), as there was no three-way interaction between age, instruc-
tion and strategy use on no-cursor reach deviations, F (1, 75) = 2.86, p = 0.09, η2 = 0.012. This
suggested that the effect of instruction on the availability of an explicit strategy was comparable
for both age groups.
In other words, despite smaller reach deviations for instructed older adults during the first
trial set in rotated training, instructed older adults did evoke the strategy during the no-cursor
reaches when asked. Crucially, it seemed that older instructed adults could evoke their explicit
strategy to the same extent as younger instructed adults. This meant that instructions evoked
explicit learning and they did so equally for younger and older adults.
Hand localization
We then tested if afferent and efferent estimates of hand location varied as a function of
explicit learning and if this was different for older and younger participants (Fig 5). First, we
confirmed that training with a rotated cursor induced shifts in hand localization using a four-
way 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 mixed ANOVA that included training session (aligned and rotated session)
and movement type (active and passive localization) as within-subject factors, and age (older
and younger) and instruction (instructed and non-instructed) as between-subjects factors.
There was a main effect of training, F (1, 75) = 231.34, p < .001, η2 = 0.28. This meant that the
estimated location of the unseen hand in the rotated session was significantly shifted relative
to the aligned session, and in the direction expected after training with a CW rotated cursor.
Moreover, training session significantly interacted with movement type, F (1, 75) = 10.01, p =
.002, η2 = 0.002. Thus, the results replicated prior findings [47] of a significant effect of move-
ment type; that is, the training-induced shifts in hand localization were larger for active locali-
zation than for passive localization, confirming an additional contribution to state estimates of
hand location from updated efferent-based predictions of sensory consequences in active
localization.
Given that the rotated cursor training led to a significant change in hand position estimates,
which in turn varied with movement type, the next step was to test whether age and instruction
affected this pattern. First, like for the reach aftereffects, we took the difference in localization
between the rotated session and the aligned session, to calculate hand localization shifts for
both the active and passive localization tasks (as plotted in Fig 5A, 5B, 5D and 5E). We tested
whether these shifts in hand-localization varied as a function of age and instruction, using a 2
x 2 ANOVA for passive localization, where only afferent (proprioceptive) information was
available (Fig 5B). Older adults (purple and blue lines) produced significantly larger shifts in
the afferent-based estimates of hand position, almost double that of younger adults (orange
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
11 / 20