PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
in hand position for each age group to zero, older adults showed only 0.84˚ shift, which did
not significantly differ from 0, t (35) = 1.07, p = 0.15, η2 = 0.032. However, the shifts for youn-
ger adults, 1.97˚, were significantly different from 0, t (41) = 4.62, p < .001, η2 = 0.481, as
found by ‘t Hart & Henriques [47]. These results were consistent with the confidence intervals
shown in Fig 5C. In summary, while older adults showed much greater shifts in afferent-based
hand localization, or proprioceptive recalibration, than younger adults, they did not show evi-
dence of a contribution from updates to efferent-based predictions in hand localization.
Discussion
In this study, we assess the effects of age on several processes in motor learning. Specifically,
we gauge the effects of age on implicit shifts in proprioceptive and predictive hand localization
as well as how these are modulated by explicit, strategy-based adaptation. We find that older
adults benefit less from explicit instruction during initial adaptation although they demon-
strate a similar amount of strategy as younger adults when reaching without a cursor after
training. In contrast, no-cursor reaches without a strategy show no impairments in implicit
changes for older adults that could contribute to age-related decline in motor learning. In fact,
instructed older adults show marginally larger without-strategy reach aftereffects. Older adults
also show clearly larger proprioceptive recalibration, which contributes to increased hand
localization shifts compared to younger adults, suggesting that specific implicit processes are
more heavily relied on with advanced age. In addition, while there is an added effect of effer-
ent-based signals on hand localization shifts in younger adults, this is not detectable in older
adults. In summary, while we find some suggestion of age-related deficits in the initial use of
an explicit strategy, we neither find deficit in the ability to evoke the strategy after training, nor
a clear effect of age on implicit motor changes. Nevertheless, we see age-related implicit
changes in hand localization, as we find that proprioceptive recalibration is larger in older
adults.
Explicit component of adaptation in aging
Our findings replicate prior research that demonstrates that instruction on how to counteract
a perturbation can benefit initial adaptation [15, 16, 26–29]. Here we find that the extent of
this benefit decreases as a function of age by about ⅓(Fig 3). Similarly, Heuer & Hegele [4, 27]
demonstrate that, when given both instruction and corrective feedback, older adults are less
able to acquire or apply a cognitive strategy when training to rotate an arrow to match the
direction they would have to reach to counter a visuomotor rotation. However, since they
average over performance throughout learning the time course of the effect is unclear. Extend-
ing this, we show that age-related differences in applying a cognitive strategy are limited to
only the initial stages of learning (specifically the first set of 3 trials), albeit for a smaller rota-
tion of 30˚. Our findings seem to indicate that the ability or willingness to adopt a novel
explicit strategy decreases with age, while the ability to apply a learned strategy is not affected.
How this affects older participants’ ability to adapt to larger rotations remains to be seen.
Other age-related deficits might emerge even in the absence of instruction, when perturba-
tions are large enough [2–7, 10, 63], which has implications for cognitive awareness and pro-
cessing of the visual perturbation [15, 28]. For smaller rotations (e.g. 30˚ rotation) the findings
are not consistent: in the absence of instructions some studies find age-related deficits in adap-
tation [12, 63] while others find no effect [4, 7]. This may be understood if implicit adaptation
is limited in scope [17, 35, 64]. The increased implicit adaptation in older adults in a task
designed to only elicit implicit adaptation [14] shows it is also possible that older adults’
increased capacity for implicit adaptation in turn reduces the overall need and capacity for
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
13 / 20