PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
explicit strategies. Either way, explicit, cognitive strategies are necessary to counter larger, but
not smaller, rotations. For example, using a 75˚ rotation, Heuer and Hegele [27, 37, 38] find
that fewer older adults show a difference between including and excluding a strategy when
asked, and when they do, the difference is smaller. Taken together, these studies suggest a
decreased ability in older adults to spontaneously develop cognitive strategies for larger rota-
tions [14].
Several studies propose that the age-related deficits in motor learning may be due to cogni-
tive decline as a function of age. Earlier work suggests at least three possible cognitive mecha-
nisms: spatial working memory [1, 65], which could be used when applying a strategy to aim
for a different location [22]; inhibition [66], which may be necessary to suppress regular,
unadapted reach planning; and divergent/convergent thinking [67], which may play a role in
discovering and fine-tuning a cognitive strategy during explicit learning. Our data here can
not provide or test any partitioning of cognitive mechanisms that do or do not contribute to
explicit motor learning. But, if fine-tuning of a strategy depends on convergent thinking [67],
an age-related deficit in convergent thinking is consistent with the smaller benefit of instruc-
tion we see in older adults’ early adaptation. In their review of this literature, Buszard & Mas-
ters [18], suggest that indeed the evidence relating cognitive performance and visuomotor
adaptation performance is weak, but stronger for sequence learning [13]. Sequence learning is
used to assess skill acquisition rather than what we test here; skill maintenance. Since mainte-
nance of existing skills is arguably fundamental for everyday life, it could make sense if this fac-
ulty is prioritized over cognitive mechanisms necessary for larger perturbations and
acquisition of new skills in advanced age. Despite valuable exploratory work [1, 63, 66, 67], the
identification of the cognitive processes that are both affected by age and involved in motor
adaptation and motor learning remains tentative and incomplete.
Implicit components of adaptation in aging
The aim of this study is not to investigate the mechanisms underlying explicit, cognitive adap-
tation, but to test the effects of age on shifts in hand localization and if these are modulated by
the availability of an explicit strategy. We first look at reach aftereffects and find little to no
effect of age on without strategy no-cursor reach deviations after training (implicit reach after-
effects). Since some studies have already found that implicit reach aftereffects are not affected
by explicit learning [16, 26], it is not surprising that we find little effect of instruction on
implicit reach aftereffects, except perhaps a slight increase in the without-strategy reach afteref-
fects in instructed older adults. We also find that both younger and older adults can evoke an
equal explicit strategy at will in no-cursor reaches. This means that any effects of age on hand
localization shifts are not due to differences in implicit adaptation and that different effects of
instruction on hand localization shifts in the two age groups are not due to different availability
of explicit strategy. Below, we will consider two contributions to shifts in hand localization:
recalibrated proprioception and updated predictions of sensory consequences.
Proprioceptive recalibration and aging. In contrast to implicit reach aftereffects, we do
see a clear effect of age on localization throughout, which seems to be driven by recalibrated
proprioception, with no evidence of an increase of predicted sensory consequences in older
adults. While an earlier study from our lab shows proprioceptive recalibration in older and
younger adults to be the same, roughly 6˚ [45], here we find it is larger in older adults (10.2˚)
as compared to younger adults (6.3˚). That previous study uses a two-alternative, forced-
choice paradigm where participants indicate whether their hand was clockwise or counter-
clockwise from a visual reference with two interleaved staircase procedures across fifty trials to
find the point of subjective equivalence. It could be that the faster method of measuring hand
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
14 / 20