PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
localization here is less susceptible to decay (cf.: [51, 68]) and that this especially affects mea-
surements in older adults. Apart from the methodological differences, Cressman et al., [45]
also have fewer older participants (9 vs. our 38) which are slightly younger (average 66 years
vs. 70 years). Consequently, increasing the sample size by roughly four times, combined with
using a slightly older population in this study perhaps provides the necessary power to detect a
difference between age groups. Nonetheless, we find that the implicit change in proprioceptive
hand estimates following learning is at least not smaller than in younger adults, and therefore
cannot explain possible age-related decline in adaptation, although it may be part of compen-
sation for age-related changes in other processes.
Another explanation for increased proprioceptive recalibration in older adults could be that
older adults rely more on visual over proprioceptive feedback. However, this does not seem to
be a good explanation for our results. Findings from Block & Bastian [69, 70] show no relation-
ship between sensory weighing and sensory realignment following training with visual-propri-
oceptive mismatches in healthy, younger adults [70] and in cerebellar patients as well as their
age-matched (i.e. older) controls [69]. In addition, other studies measuring estimates of final
hand positions also fail to find a correlation between hand estimates using multiple modalities
and the precision or relative reliability of either visual or proprioceptive-only estimates of loca-
tion [71–73]. While there are studies that suggest that proprioceptive acuity is poorer in older
adults than younger adults (see [74] for a review), including one that tests felt hand position in
our own lab [45], the current study, with our much larger sample of participants and larger
number of proprioceptive trials, does not find that older adults are less precise in their esti-
mates of hand position prior to training with a rotated cursor [75]. Moreover, when compared
across all these older and younger adults, the size of proprioceptive recalibration does not cor-
relate at all with the amount of variance in hand-estimates [75]. Together, these studies dem-
onstrate that a possibly greater reliance on vision resulting in greater proprioceptive
recalibration in older adults cannot simply be explained by poorer proprioceptive sensitivity
[76]. Further studies are required to understand the factors that influence the amount of pro-
prioceptive recalibration.
Updated prediction with age.
Motor learning does not only lead to changes in implicit
processes such as proprioceptive estimates of hand position, but also to updates in predicted
sensory consequences–a required change to produce implicit adaptation. ‘t Hart and Henri-
ques [47] found that proprioception accounted for at least half of learning-induced changes in
hand localization (as originally found by [60, 61] using only an active localization task), com-
pared to prediction. This partitioning out of predictive and proprioceptive based change is
consistent with the results of the cerebellar patients in the studies by Izawa et al. [61] and
Synofzik et al. [60]. Both studies find that the patients show a significant change in active hand
localization following adaptation, but that the change in hand estimates is smaller than in
healthy controls. Both studies interpret their result to support the idea that the cerebellum is
critical for updating the predicted consequences of movements during learning. This leaves
open the possibility that the remaining localization shift found in the cerebellar patients may
be due to proprioceptive recalibration, which our lab has shown to also occur in cerebellar
patients [56]. In the current study, the relative proportion of predicted and perceived changes
in hand localization was even more skewed than those of ‘t Hart and Henriques [47] (despite
more training targets and more localization trials), with younger adults showing a change in
hand localization: 80% of which was due to a change in proprioception and 20% a change in
prediction. The change in predictive estimates of hand position is further reduced in older
adults, such that the ~1˚ change is not statistically detectable (although their proprioceptive
change is 50% larger than that of younger adults). This difference is not significant relative to
younger adults since the changes for younger adults are also quite small; approximately
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
15 / 20