PLOS ONE
The effect of age on visuomotor learning processes
20% of the total localization shift reflecting only a 2 to 3˚ shift (Fig 5C and 5F). It may be
that the proprioceptive recalibration of larger magnitudes in older adults may act as a ceil-
ing effect or generally mask any further change due to prediction. Nonetheless, given that
we find no clear age-related effect on updates of predicted estimates–which are implicit by
nature and not affected by instruction (as shown in [16])–we can not definitively claim
here that decreased updates in predicted estimates explain age-related effects on motor
adaptation, but it does remain a possibility. If updates of predicted sensory consequences
do decrease in old age, this could hint at age-related deficits in the cerebellar contribution
to motor adaptation. This would also explain the absence of a difference between active
and passive localization we see in our findings. Conversely, in order to get hand location
estimates to match visual feedback as much as in younger adults, this might spur an
increase in proprioceptive recalibration, as we observe in this study.
The clearest effect we find in this study is the age-related increase in hand-localization shifts in
older adults that is not modulated by the availability of a strategy. Whether or not this underlies a
larger reliance on implicit learning or is an effect of reduced proprioceptive acuity in older adults
remains to be seen. Other perspectives assume a deficit in explicit adaptation that in turn necessi-
tates a larger reliance on implicit adaptation. However, some studies find that implicit adaptation
is limited to about what we find here [35], so that implicit learning would not be able to compen-
sate for loss of explicit adaptation in advanced age. However, with the same paradigm that should
only result in implicit learning, i.e. no modulation by explicit learning should be possible, older
adults still adapt more [14]. This hints at another possibility: with advanced age, we have an
increased capacity for implicit adaptation [77], in turn reducing the need for explicit adaptation
or we simply forego explicit adaptation as we learn from experience that this is often wasted
effort. All this work also suggests that the additive nature of the push-pull dynamics between
explicit and implicit processes that many studies tacitly assume, may just be overly simplistic. For
example, in the current work, as in some of our other work [16, 36], we can clearly elicit explicit
adaptation, but this does not modulate implicit adaptation. Here we see that in advanced age, the
composition of implicit processes contributing to adaptation may change. Of course, with larger
perturbations, explicit processes are engaged more [16, 17], and this is where age-related deficits
in motor adaptation are clearer. To overcome this, e.g. for rehabilitation purposes, the focus of
motor learning research should perhaps be on how to improve or increase implicit contributions
to motor learning and motor adaptation, especially in an aging population.
Conclusion
In this study we keep explicit contributions to motor adaptation comparable in both older and
younger participants, in order to test age effects on hand localization shifts. We find larger
hand localization shifts in older adults compared to younger adults, and these are largely due
to an increase in proprioceptive recalibration. In contrast, updated predictions of sensory con-
sequences may or may not be lower in older adults but can not explain age differences. Our
data are in line with the hypothesis that decreased proprioceptive acuity leads to an increase in
implicit adaptation in advanced age. However, given the slightly slower adoption of the strat-
egy provided by our instructions, it may also be that with advanced age, people rely more on
automatic implicit processes rather than effortful explicit learning. Regardless, proprioceptive
recalibration is increased in older adults, and this shows that aging may lead to subtle, yet
important changes, in sensorimotor learning and multisensory integration.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Bernard Marius ‘t Hart, Denise Y. P. Henriques.
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239032
September 14, 2020
16 / 20